Add page whole molecule damage (#40)
SPAAM-community/little-book-of-smiley-plots: whole-molecule-damage.qmd

Interestingly, this is not necessarily an invalid smiley plot. In this special case, the ancient DNA is in fact unusually derived from an ancient hair sample.
@Wang2022-mb interpreted this damage pattern to be unique to sample types like hair, that contain DNA that have already undergone extensive and accelerated fragmentation and damage from sunlight radiation during the life of the individual.
This is particularly the case for the DNA from this individual, as the individual lived in Sudan, Africa, a region that long periods of intense sunlight.
Furthermore, the dry and arid environment may have reduced enzymatic activity and hydrolytic reactions that is the typical mechanism for causing the damage at the molecular termini [@Wang2022-mb]. 

This exceptional damage is also reflected in the shorter-median fragment length of the library, with a significant number of molecules being shorter than an equivalent bone sample [@Wang2022-mb], as well the C to T misincorporation frequencies elevated at both the 5p and 3p ends (rather than G to A in the 3p), as to be expected from [single-stranded libraries](single-stranded.qmd).

> Despite the unusual damage pattern, after reducing typical read-length filters of 30bp to 25bp, the authors did not detect any major effects in downstream analysis of the shotgun data. They were able to perform routine human population genetics analysis as normal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the unusual damage pattern, after reducing typical read-length filters of 30bp to 25bp, the authors obtained extremely low-coverage data, which were however sufficient to place the individual into regional ancestry within Eastern Africa using routine human population genetics analysis.
```

In this case, this would have already resulted in single-stranded DNA being present in the hair, with nucleotides throughout the entire molecule being exposed to the radiation.
This is unlike 'typical' double-stranded aDNA where only the single-stranded overhangs would be exposed.

This exposure to radiation would have been particularly strong in the case of this individual, as they lived in Sudan, Africa, a region that has long periods of intense sunlight.
Furthermore, the dry and arid environment may have reduced enzymatic activity and hydrolytic reactions that is the typical mechanism for causing the damage at the molecular termini [@Wang2022-mb]. 

This exceptional damage is also reflected in the shorter-median fragment length of the library, with a significant number of molecules being shorter than an equivalent bone sample [@Wang2022-mb], as well the C to T misincorporation frequencies elevated at both the 5p and 3p ends (rather than G to A in the 3p), as to be expected from [single-stranded libraries](single-stranded.qmd).

> Despite the unusual damage pattern, after reducing typical read-length filters of 30bp to 25bp, the authors obtained extremely low-coverage data. However it was still sufficient to place the individual into regional ancestry within Eastern Africa using routine human population genetics analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the high levels of damage throughout and the poor preservation, after reducing typical read-length filters of 30bp to 25bp, the authors obtained extremely low-coverage data. However, it was still sufficient to place the individual into regional ancestry within Eastern Africa using routine human population genetics analysis.
```

Reviewer: Sorry, just a last comment, because the sentence now sounds weird with "Despite".

Author: No worries!
